Let's see if this works better than Mars Observer.
Okay, this is Ron Sharn interviewing Dale
Cruickshank, Older Colorado, October 19th,
1993.
Dale, for the record, would you please give your
full name? Yes, I am Dale Paul Cruickshank. And
when and where were you born? I was born in Des
Moines, Iowa, 1939, August 10th. When did you get
interested in astronomy? I got interested in
astronomy... When I was about 12 or 13 years old,
the first astronomical event of my life was the
total eclipse of the sun of June 30, 1954, at which
time I was 13 years old, I think. And my mother took
me and a school friend to northern Michigan to see
the totality phase. And it was a success. And from
then on, it was clear that I had to be an astronomer.
Okay, where did you go to undergraduate school? I
was an undergraduate physics major at Iowa State
University in Ames. I graduated from there in 1961
and went from there then to the University of
Arizona where I was a graduate student. I got a
master's degree in planetary geology in 1966, I
believe it was, and finished a PhD in 1968. also in
the geology department with an emphasis on
planetary geology. So what were you doing at
Yerkes in the summer of 1959? When I was midway
through my freshman year at Iowa State, I already
started thinking about graduate school and began
to write to various schools that had astronomy
programs, and one of those schools, of course, was
the University of Chicago. And I got a very nice
letter back answering the questions I had asked,
and telling me about a summer program that was held
at Yerkes Observatory for undergraduates and
inviting me to apply for that. I did apply and was
told that the program was really for more advanced
undergraduates than someone who was just
finishing their freshman year, but that if I could
provide a suitable letter of recommendation,
they would consider my application. So this was
correspondence with Joe Chamberlain, who at the
time was the chairman of the student admission
program, I think. So I managed to get a letter of
recommendation from Philip Riggs, who was the
astronomer at the Drake University and operated
the Drake Municipal Observatory, and with whom
I'd become friends because I lived in Des Moines.
And so Riggs sent a letter of recommendation that
was accepted by Chamberlain and the committee,
and I was offered the summer job. So I showed up at
Yerkes in the early summer of 1958.
What did you do there? The first summer, I worked in
the darkroom on Kuiper's lunar atlas project, at
which time he was assembling the photographs from
ground-based telescopes around the world, the
best lunar photographs to assemble into the lunar
atlas that was supported by the US Air Force. And I
remember I'd had a lot of experience with darkroom
work just as an amateur photographer. It was
pretty easy to fit into that role, and I enjoyed it a
lot. I remember the thrill on one afternoon when
Kuiper came around to the dark rooms shortly after
I had arrived and introduced himself and saw what I
was doing and came in and was helping me produce a
couple of prints from some of these lunar
negatives. And there we stood side by side with our
hands in the developer tank rubbing on one of these
prints to try to increase the development in a
place that needed a little bit of extra help. And it
was a real thrill because I had known Kuyper's
name, of course, from reading the textbooks and so
on. And there we were in the darkroom rubbing
prints together. We'll get back to him in a while.
But now, you got your PhD in what year? 1968. OK.
Where did you go from there? I went pretty much
directly to Moscow from there. I had been
interested in Russia, Russian language, Russian
culture, the Russian science program since
undergraduate days when I started to study the
language. And Kuiper was interested in it, too. I,
of course, spent my graduate years with him there
in Tucson. And he had developed contacts with the
Soviet Union in terms of its lunar and planetary
exploration program. And I asked him to help me try
to get one of the National Academy of Sciences
exchange appointments to the Soviet Union. The
exchange program was fairly quiet, but
reasonably active at the time. And he helped, and I
got one of the appointments. So shortly after I got
my degree, within a couple of months, I took off for
Moscow, spent a better part of a year there, and
returned to Tucson in the summer of 1969. What did
you do, aside from hearing me over the radio in the
caucuses one time, what did you do in Moscow? The
reason that it made sense to go there in the first
place is that Vasily Moroz was a planetary
astronomer working in the near infrared with
equipment very comparable in quality to what
Kuiper had in Tucson and the equipment that I had
used under Kuiper's direction in Tucson. So it
made sense to go there and find out what Moroz was
doing to work with him on planetary problems and so
on. He received me in Moscow, and we did, in fact,
work together. We observed together in the
Crimea, wrote a couple of papers, and it was, in
general, quite an adventure. So it was an
opportunity to spend 10 or 11 months with the
Russian counterpart of Kuiper's program to
assess what they were doing to actually make a a few
interesting observations, write a couple of
papers. Where'd you go from there? I went back to
Tucson in the summer of 69 and spent almost, well,
essentially a year there as Kuiper's associate.
It was clear, however, that I would always be cast
in the role of a former student, and Kuiper and I had
a couple of tussles over scientific issues during
that year's time. I was talking at the same time
with the people in Hawaii, namely Bob Murphy, who
is now at NASA headquarters, David Morrison, and
with Bill Sinton and John Jeffries at the
University of Hawaii about a possible position
there. And they offered one. I originally turned
it down, and then when things got tight with Kuiper
again, it looked like it would be appropriate to
accept it. I did, and then in either late June or
early July, I took off for Hawaii and stayed there
for the better part of 18 years. What did you do at
Hawaii? Hawaii was, in the summer of 1970, putting
the finishing touches on the 2.2-meter telescope
that the NASA Planetary Program had funded. NASA
built the telescope roughly at a cost of $3
million. The state of Hawaii provided the
building and infrastructure roughly for a cost of
$2 This was one, of course, of the several NASA
telescopes that were built during that era. And
they were trying to build a program of
ground-based astronomy, nighttime
ground-based astronomy, because they already
had a solar program. And we're building staff.
We're finishing up this telescope and so on. So it
was an opportunity to get in on the ground floor of
the exploitation and development of Mauna Kea as a
ground-based observing site which turned out, of
course, later to be world-class quality. So I went
to Hawaii on a research position with no teaching
obligations, and it was one of those very rare
opportunities to move into an academic setting
with all of the best of the opportunities and very
little of the liabilities. What did you work on? I
began working immediately on planetary
problems. The 2.2 meter telescope had a large Kude
spectrograph, which was available essentially
as the telescope was commissioned. And I began
doing high dispersion Kude spectroscopy,
photographic spectroscopy. And I remember the
first problem I worked on was ammonia on Saturn.
There was not at that time a positive detection of
ammonia on Saturn, although it was obvious on
Jupiter. Although it was in some textbooks, but it
was wrong. That's right, yes. So I used,
I think not the highest, but next highest
dispersion spectrograph with about two
angstroms per millimeter photographic looking
for the 6450 band of ammonia on Saturn, and I
couldn't find it with what I thought was a rather
high sensitivity limit. So I published an
abstract and presented that at a DPS meeting, I
think in 1971, I believe, I'm not certain, but I
believe that my abstract was the first published
scientific result from the 88-inch or 2.2-meter
telescope. I've never made a point of that to my
Hawaii colleagues, but for what it's worth, I
think that is in fact true. Where did you go after
Hawaii? Well, of course, Hawaii was an experience
that ran nearly 18 years, and so I'd really
developed almost all of my professional career
during that period. I left Hawaii after 17 and a
half years. In what year? I believe late 87 and
began a position at NASA Ames Research Center in
California in January of 88. Why the switch? I made
the switch primarily because my family and I were
tired of living in Hawaii. And it was, in fact, that
personal decision that motivated us to consider
leaving the islands. Hawaii had tremendous
professional opportunities and advantages, and
I was not in the slightest dissatisfied with those
professional aspects of the situation. The
Institute for Astronomy during that 17 and a half
years certainly did change, But I was very much a
part of it. I was made to feel extremely welcome and
valued there. Yet, based on my family's personal
desire to return to the mainland United States, we
decided to leave Hawaii. And the opportunity for a
position at NASA Ames arose largely through the
help of Michael Werner and James Pollock at NASA
Ames, both of whom wanted me there. And so they made
an opportunity, and we took it. Are you still
there? I'm still at NASA Ames. It's coming up on six
years. What are you doing, or what have you done?
I'm continuing the very kind of thing I was doing in
Hawaii, specifically spectroscopy in the
infrared and near-infrared of planetary
objects. And during the time since I started that
business in the early 60s, which has now been
almost exactly 30 years. Enormous advances have
been made in the technology of infrared
observations at all wavelengths and it's a real
pleasure and a thrill to still ride on the crest of
that wave as we continue to open up new levels of
sensitivity and brightness and difficulty in
looking at the infrared spectral signatures of
small, distant, faint, cold solar system bodies.
Isn't it nice not to have to ammoniate plates
anymore? It's nice not to have to ammoniate
plates, and I did a fair amount of that too. I still
have scars from some of that, but that's another
story. You're the obvious person to ask this.
While this project that I'm doing is subtitled
NASA and the Rebirth of Planetary Astronomy. I do
want to mention some other stuff. Now, the former
Soviet Union had a huge program in science and
everything, and a huge space program and so forth.
But they never... As Gerard de Bacalura said,
they'd take a telescope this small, holding his
fingers a centimeter apart, and get an image this
small, holding his fingers a millimeter apart,
take an equation this long, holding his... hands a
yard apart, and get a wrong result. Now, it seems to
me they had the highest ratio of effort to results
that I've ever heard of in any field of science.
What's your view about that? Is that true? And if
so, why? Well, let me try to answer that with a
specific focus on the near-infrared, which is my
primary area of expertise. As I indicated before,
I went to Moscow in the first place because Moroz
had a detector and a spectrometer comparable to
what Kuiper had. And this involved a lead sulfide
single element detector that was attached to a
spectrometer working in the lead sulfide region,
that is, lead sulfide cooled with dry ice or
nitrogen and operating out to about two and a half
or three microns. Now, I'm told that the way the
Russians got that lead sulfide detector is that in
earlier years when the Russians were friends with
the Chinese, that the Chinese had come upon an
American rocket with a heat seeking guidance
system. And that heat seeking, this was probably
aftermath of the Korean conflict, maybe during
the Korean conflict. But anyway, the Chinese gave
this rocket sensing device to the Russians, their
friends. The Russians took it apart, discovered
that it was a lead sulfide detector, and proceeded
to analyze it in such a way that they could make one
themselves. An entire institute of probably
greater than 100 people was assigned this task,
and they, in fact, did make lead sulfide detectors
of comparable quality. A couple of these found
their way into the hands of scientists, Moreau's
in particular, and he was able to exploit it for
scientific use. As I'm told, this story, this
particular science institute was This was
essentially their only task, was to deal with this
one detector system. And after several years of
working, continuing on it, they got so entrenched
and ingrown and inbred that they even lost the
technique themselves. And after they had had this
initial success, they couldn't do it anymore. Yet
the Institute and all the personnel stayed intact
and proceeded down their merry way because
apparently nobody called them off and told them to
go do something else. So that was apparently the
apex, the culmination of Russian near-infrared
detector development. And to my understanding,
it never got any better. And they were never able,
after that initial success, to keep up with
Western achievements, Western developments in
detector development. Let's go back to GPK now. He
was on the Project Alsos mission, which everyone
always confused with Operation Paperclip, but
Alsos went in with the combat troops sometimes
ahead of them. And that's where I understand that
GPK picked up the infrared technology that he
used. Well, I think that's not entirely correct.
It's related. Kuiper was working on Alsos to
evaluate German technological achievements and
developments and so on. And that story is very
nicely told in David Dvorkin's book, by the way,
the 1992 book. Which is entitled? I've forgotten.
It's something about the German vengeance weapon
or something of the kind. It's an excellent book
and a very nice little piece, well referenced
about Kuiper's involvement with Alsace. In any
case, Kuiper's academic colleague, Robert
Cashman, in the United States, was the American
developer of of the lead sulfide detectors. And
Cashman worked with Kuiper or vice versa to
produce one of these things after they were
declassified, just following the war, to produce
one of these things for use in an astronomical
spectrometer at the McDonald Observatory. What
Kuiper learned about German detector
development, I don't know in detail, but I think he
found that they were close on the heels or perhaps
even a little bit better at these near-infrared
detectors than the Americans were. The details of
that I'm not certain about. But the upshot of it in
terms of his ability to have a detector and begin
this pioneering work in near-infrared
spectroscopy, both in stellar and planetary
work, came from his association with Cashman. And
Cashman's A brief obituary of Cashman appeared
not long ago in Physics Today, where there's a
brief assessment of his work on these
near-infrared detectors. The association with
Cashman, as I say, produced a detector, one of
which, by the way, is now in the collection at the
National Air and Space Museum. I managed to
salvage this from Kuiper's collection of
memorabilia, and it was donated to the museum a
couple of years ago. So they have it, one of the very
ones that was used in the original spectrometer
that Kuiper used. Now, Kuiper was, and I know this
because I funded him when I was at headquarters,
was the guy that first realized what a great site
Mauna Kea was. But he got frozen out of it. What do
you know about that? The story of Kuiper's
association with Mauna Kea is rather accurately
told in the... two lengthy editorials by Mitch
Waldrop in Science. And these appeared roughly 10
years ago. I can't remember exactly. It's a
complex story. Some of the details, I think, are
forever obscure because they relate to Kuiper's
feelings about it. Essentially, Kuiper
recognized the potential of Mauna Kea, dealt
directly with the governor of the state of Hawaii,
John Burns, who received him very well and who
supported the initial site surveys at Mauna Kea.
At the same time, however, the University of
Hawaii was trying to build a program in astronomy,
primarily in solar astronomy as a follow-on to the
International Geophysical Year, which had taken
place in 1957-58. There was work on aurora and,
again, on the sun done on HaleakalÄ, And this work
was done through the University of Hawaii. Well,
they hired a solar astronomer, John T. Jeffries,
who brought with him an entourage of solar
physicists from Boulder, Colorado. And they
began this program of solar work. Well, they
decided that while Kuiper was busily working with
the governor of Hawaii to assess the qualities of
Mauna Kea for nighttime astronomy, NASA
solicited proposals for a major optical
telescope on Mauna Kea. Kuiper, with the
assistance of Harold Johnson, also in Tucson,
naturally put in a proposal to do this. But NASA
didn't want a single proposal because it was
clearly non-competitive. So they solicited
proposals from other agencies or other
universities and were given proposals by Harvard
University and also by the University of Hawaii.
John Jeffries, sort of on last minute, put
together this proposal to go in, in parallel with
Kuiper's proposal to NASA for a telescope there.
After these proposals were evaluated, the choice
was made to go with the University of Hawaii. And
William Brunk tells me, who was in the driver's
seat at that time, that they, at NASA
headquarters, felt that Kuiper was
overextended. He had too many irons in the fire at
various places around the world, and they felt
that John Jeffries and his solar crew, while more
or less unproven for nighttime astronomy, should
be given the opportunity to do it. They were on the
site, they were there, and should be given the
opportunity, Kuiper being overextended. The
Harvard proposal, apparently, was not very
competitive. That was Menzel's. That's right.
I'll tell you, since I'm writing a book, I can say
anything I want. Brunk was new. He never did have
any track record as a scientist. Nancy Roman told
me personally before I left headquarters that
Kuiper would have a telescope on Mauna Kea over her
dead body. Nancy Roman's involvement is an
element that I really don't know anything about.
Let me ask you something on a related matter.
Kuiper left the directorship of Yerkes and
McDonald rather suddenly, and in fact,
Frank Edmondson keeps telling me, although I've
never seen any proof, but he says he's got
documentary proof that Kuiper was summarily
fired as director of Yerkes and McDonald. What do
you know about that? I would have to refer to my
notes on that. I've been in touch with Frank
Edmondson about this and with various other
people as well, and As I was putting together the
manuscript for my biographical memoir on Kuiper
that will soon be published by the National
Academy, I was fully convinced that this
assertion is true and that Kuiper was forced to
step down. And I would have to refer to my notes and
sources to recall the exact circumstances. on
that, and I have agreed already to provide that to
you, Ron, so that you can consider that. You're on
the record now. Sure. Let me ask you a personal
question. Because GPK obviously is a key player in
the rebirth of planetary astronomy, and I can't
interview him. What was he like? Kriper was a very
intense personality, a very imposing figure
physically, and an absolutely domineering
character intellectually. He had a profound
effect on my life, certainly at the professional
level, but as the years go by, I see he had a profound
effect on my life in a personal sense, too. There
are other people upon whose lives he has had
similar profound influences, and Tom Geralds is
one such. Tom Geralds and I have, over the last many
years, talked a lot, written a lot to one another,
trying to come to grips, to reach peace with this
effect that Kuiper has had on both of our lives.
Gerholtz, of course, is a fellow Dutchman. In any
case, and dealt with Kuiper primarily earlier on,
in any event, Kuiper was a
domineering individual whose intellect one
could only respect and One evidence of that is that
even essentially everyone who worked with him
called him Dr. Kuyper. He was Gerard only to a very,
very small inner circle of people who were
essentially his contemporaries. Fred Whipple.
Fred Whipple and Harold Johnson and Frank Lowe and
those folks were able to call him Gerard, which, by
the way, wasn't his real name. That's an
Americanized version of Gerrit, which was his
Dutch given name. In any case... He, on the one
hand, was a marvelous conversationalist, had a
very nice sense of humor, and was a joy to be around
in many respects. He was extremely impatient, on
the other hand, with anybody who appeared to be
intellectually inferior to him, to have less
knowledge than him, and so on. He didn't deal with
students very well. He was very difficult to work
with and to work for. His general demeanor was one
of extreme arrogance, and it took a lot to get past
that, to be able to work with him, to be able to stand
him. But once you did, there was a lot to be derived
from the association, a lot of positive things to
be derived from the association. And for those of
us who were able to get on top of that demeanor
issue, We derived a lot of benefit from the
association. Joe Chamberlain said something
about, he was a very loyal man, and I mentioned that
to Fred Whipple, and he said yes, he agreed, he said
yes, he certainly was perhaps too loyal in some
cases, but he said Gerard's main problem was he
couldn't get along with people. That's right,
that's quite right, and I think that that That
showed up when Kuiper arrived in America around
1929 or 1930 and went to the Lick Observatory as a
postdoc, later to become a Kellogg Fellow at the
Lick Observatory. I mentioned earlier Philip
Riggs, who was the astronomer in Des Moines where I
grew up. Philip Riggs was a graduate student at
Lick Observatory when Kuiper arrived as a fresh
postdoc from Holland. When I told after I spent the
first summer at Yerkes Observatory, now in 1958,
and went back to Des Moines and talked to Philip
Riggs, who had recommended me for the job. The
first thing he asked me was, has old Gerard Kuiper
learned to get along with anybody yet? And that
told me right then and there that this problem had
arisen, and this element of Kuiper's personality
showed up from day one. By the way, Phil Riggs spent
a summer at the University of Illinois. I was his
teaching assistant. Oh, is that right? That's how
I know him. That's great. He's a wonderful man. Now
let me connect Kuiper with going back now to the
history of planetary astronomy.
When you started, did you feel inferior to real
astronomers who worked on stars and galaxies?
Well, in a way, yes. And in a way, no. As I've already
mentioned, I got my first acquaintance with real
professional astronomers at Yerkes
Observatory. And this was an extraordinary
opportunity from a boy from the cornfields of Iowa
to go to this imposing architectural structure in
the farmland of Wisconsin, a place from the last
century with gargoyles and and all that sort of
thing. It was neo-Gothic right there in the middle
of Wisconsin. The first foreigners I ever talked
to, the first people with advanced degrees,
essentially, that I ever spoke with were there at
Yerkes. So this summer of 1958 was an
extraordinary experience. Well, I say that to
answer your question that, naturally, Yerkes
Observatory was populated and dominated by
classical stellar astronomers, the likes of
Morgan, Hiltner, Abt, Chandrasekhar. S.
Chandrasekhar. S. Chandrasekhar, and on and on.
And Kuiper and his entourage of flunkies,
essentially, some transports or transplants
from England, amateur astronomers from England,
and here this kid down in the darkroom rubbing
prints with the great man himself. So Kuiper was an
anomaly. His program was an anomaly. And all of us
who were part of it were made to feel anomalous. We
were, sure, treated well. I was given opportunity
to spend evenings playing with a 40-inch
telescope and so on. Yet there was this element of
the whole thing was an amateur astronomy project.
Do you think the fact that Kuiper was able to get big
bucks out of the Air Force rankled with some of
the... Oh, I think it must have, sure. Kuiper...
The thing that I have to keep reminding myself is
that when I got acquainted with Kuiper in that
summer of 1958, the man had already done an entire
career's worth of classical stellar astronomy,
double star work, white dwarf work, and stellar
spectroscopy, and done excellent work, the
bolometric corrections and so on, some of which is
still very valuable work. He had begun to pursue
solar system work as essentially an outgrowth of
his interest in binary stars and their formation
and so on. But the man already had this strong
scientific reputation before he even began to
pursue planetary things. And as I've pointed out
in my biographical memoir, his discovery of the
atmosphere of Titan was purely an accident. He ran
out of white dwarfs to take spectra of during the
night at McDonald, and he decided to look at a few
planetary objects, discovered methane on Titan,
and that was the sort of beginning of his
observational work in planetary astronomy.
Well, anyway, that was an accident. But he was the
director of Yerkes, the director of this bunch of
stellar classical astrophysics prima donnas,
who by this time had, I think, grown to loathe him.
Yet they had to deal with him because he was the
director, and he also commanded this very large
amount of funding from an unexpected source. It
wasn't, I mean, it was from a government source,
and astronomers weren't used to that in those
days, and they had no choice but to deal with him.
this person with a richness of resources. So I
think there was a resentment there that grew out of
the jealousy over the funding. It grew out of the
difficulty of his personality. When Otto Struve
was the director, Otto was able to keep these prima
donnas pretty much in harmony, just because of the
strength of his own personality and his own
managerial skills. But when Struve was gone, The
place began to unravel, and it unraveled along a
variety of lines that were related to these strong
personalities, the diversity of scientific
interests, and no doubt the jealousy over
research funds. In your personal opinion, back
around 1958, 59, 60, do you think that planetary
astronomy was considered second-rate and
inferior by the, quote, establishment? Oh, it's
clear to me that it was, yes. As I say, my first
connections with the establishment were at this
rather peculiar place, Yerkes Observatory. But
as I expanded my experiences and contacts to
various other places in the country and other
institutions, it became clearer and clearer that
planetary science, planetary astronomy, as it
was considered in those days, that's really all
there was, was definitely regarded as inferior.
And I've spent the last 30 years in some ways trying
to understand how that came to be, and is there any
way to, is there any antidote for it, or are we
always going to be plagued with this problem as
long as planetary science is identified as such?
That brings up the next question. How do you think
real, quote-unquote, astronomers think of
planetary astronomy now? Now. I believe that the
generation represented by Kuiper, and this
includes such people as Jeff Burbage, who was a
personal enemy of Kuiper, and various other
people of that generation still have rather
negative feelings about it. Let's say the people
at what's now Mount Palomar observatory. These
folks are cosmologists, primarily, and
classical astronomers, and I'm sure they have a
very dim view of the value of planetary science.
The Mount Wilson syndrome. Yeah, right. But even
in Hawaii, where we had a rather unusual
situation. As I say, the program was just getting
started in 1970. That is, the nighttime astronomy
program was just getting started. And planetary
people were already involved. Bill Sinton was
there, David Morrison, Bob Murphy, and then I
showed up in 1970. And because I know I wrote the
funding memo, that funds were given to Hawaii,
committed for a long time, that they must do
planetary work. That's right. They must do
planetary work.
And that was all fine. I mean, that's why the
telescope was built, but it was clear that it would
be used for a large fraction of the time would be for
planetary work and the remainder for classical
astronomy. The point I'd like to make is that that
program developed and grew with a complete
intertwining of classical astronomers, stellar
astronomers, and planetary people, and the
outcome of that was very positive in that there was
a mutual respect, a family atmosphere and
attitude, such that we all took a lot of pleasure in
each other's successes and discoveries. And
people interested in galaxies, such as Alan
Stockton, people interested in classical
stellar spectroscopy, such as Sidney Wolfe and
Walter Bonsack, were working side by side with
those people I've already mentioned doing
planetary work. And as we grew up together, all of
us having gone there, except Bill Sinton as fairly
young people, we developed a camaraderie and a
family mood, which was very productive and very
supportive. Before I left Hawaii, that had begun
to change because John Jeffries had left, Don Hall
had become the director, and his hiring policies
had put into faculty positions there a larger
number of cosmologists and people interested in
extragalactic studies. And so the attitude
toward planetary science, I think, even in
Hawaii, had begun to shift a bit, to become a little
less tolerant, a little less interested, and
maybe a little less respectful. However, while I
was still there, planetary astronomy had still an
important role at the Institute, primarily
because of the funding structure. Also, we had
productive scientists, but there was still sort
of a cudgel that we held in that The 88-inch
telescope was still supported primarily by a
grant from NASA Planetary Programs, and in the
form of a large single grant that exceeded a
quarter of a million dollars for a combination of
support of the telescope and the support of the
planetary research, all of which was under the
single umbrella of one grant. And that structure
broke down essentially as I left by mutual
agreement with headquarters and the Institute
for Astronomy. But at least during the years I was
there, Planetary astronomy was respected, it was
well supported, and we had a wonderful supportive
arrangement with the classical stellar
astronomers. I think that is less so now. That was
one case where people actually talked to each
other. That's right, and in friendly terms. One
last thing about Kuiper. Do you think the fact that
he was in what was considered a second-rate field
reinforced his personality character, his
negative personality characters, and gave him
this embattled status? I'm not so sure. I think
Kriper was a difficult personality to the core,
and that he had an element of arrogance and
self-assurance that allowed him to rise above or
beyond the criticisms of his colleagues and
pursue his own path with complete
self-assurance. At the time, he had a good
relationship with S. Chandrasekhar. I think they
also had some difficult times, but they were in
very different areas of science. And I think that,
well, I'm not sure where I was going with that, but
I'll just say again that I think Kuiper didn't have
a siege mentality. He felt completely
self-assured that his course was right. Now we'll
get on to a different subject, and this is
something that nothing has been written about
this. And the people involved are all dead. So I've
got to ask people's personal opinions who are in
the field now. At the turn of the century,
planetary astronomy was still a popular topic. I
mean, Henry Norris Russell did stuff on Venus and
all that. By 1920, it was not only not popular, it
wasn't safe to be in what killed planetary
astronomy. I think two people killed it. I think
Percival Lowell killed it in the United States,
and Camille Flammarion killed it in Europe.
That's exactly Gerard de Vaucouleur's comment.
Well, I haven't talked to de Vaucouleur about
this, but I... It's right in this book. Good,
great. I came to this awareness when I was
researching some... work by Barnard, Edward
Emerson Barnard, on his life and times. Barnard
was a voice of reason during the Canals on Mars era.
He was a Chautauqua series lecturer with lantern
slides of pictures that he had taken, being one of
the great pioneers of photography and astronomy,
and discoverer of comets and whatnot, and the
fifth satellite of Jupiter. He was a well-known
personality, but he didn't write popular books
and didn't have the same charisma, contacts, and
persona that Percival Lowell did. Percival
Lowell wrote numerous books on the habitability
of Mars and the nature of Mars' intelligent
civilization and all this and that, based in large
part upon his observations and those of his
colleagues under his thumb at Lowell Observatory
of the canals and seasonal changes on Mars. This
attracted a lot of attention in the popular press
and lent an aura of silliness to planetary studies
as seen by classical astronomers. What you
indicated was true, that a major part of the
program of nearly all professional astronomical
observatories in the latter part of the 19th
century was planetary work. They were doing
planetary visual observations, searches for
satellites, spectroscopy and photography, what
have you. And this was a very legitimate part of
classical astronomy at the end of the 19th
century. Well, this business about the canals on
Mars, I think, gave that an aura of science fiction
and that primarily the efforts and the charisma of
Percival Lowell in this country did it. I believe,
although I'm not as well acquainted with it, that
parallel activity in Europe by Flammarion, with,
again, a volley of popular books and articles,
produced essentially the same effect there.
What's the best piece of work you've done in
astronomy? The best piece of work I've done is
probably the work on the spectrum of Neptune's
satellite, Triton, in which persistence in
Studying the near-infrared spectrum produced
the detection and identification of methane,
frozen methane on Triton, and frozen nitrogen,
which we now recognize as the dominant material on
the surface of Triton and Pluto. I continue to
pursue this as the technology permits us to do a
better and better job. Now, in 1989, of course,
Voyager flew by Triton and found some very
interesting things and corroborated the
presence of nitrogen and methane, but it didn't
show anything else. And in the meantime, we've
found from additional ground-based work, carbon
dioxide and carbon monoxide ices on Triton, and
evidence of some other very interesting
hydrocarbons, which we haven't even yet
announced. So it turns out that the persistence in
trying to detect, measure, and interpret the
spectrum of a little object, 30 astronomical
units from the sun, something that has a
temperature in the neighborhood of less than 40
Kelvin and is to the telescope only almost 14th
magnitude, has proven to be a very, very rich
spectrum, which we continue to interpret and find
extremely interesting chemistry and
information on the early development of the solar
system. What did you have the most fun doing so far?
Well, certainly the work on nitrogen has been some
of the most fun. I also had an enormous amount of fun
with our 20-micron detections of faint objects in
the solar system. And I remember very well
standing on the Cassegrain platform in the cold at
the 88-inch telescope in Hawaii in the mid-'70s,
measuring the thermal radiation from Trojan
asteroids at 20 microns. These are objects which
had never been detected thermally before. And I
was able to get the first measurements of heat from
those dark, small, little objects. And by the way,
the detection of heat itself indicated that they
were dark objects which absorbed a lot of sunlight
and had low albedos. Similarly, with two of the
outer satellites of Jupiter, I knew what I was
looking for. I knew that if I could detect them at
all that that meant they were little black
objects. Standing there on the platform seeing
the strip chart recorder make a positive
detection was a tremendous thrill. Have you had
any fiascos or dead ends? Oh, sure. I've had some
mistakes. What's your greatest fiasco? Well, I'd
preface this by saying that I've enjoyed being on
what is a cutting edge of detections and
measurements in planetary astronomy. And when
you're on an edge, you can fall sometimes on one
side and fall sometimes on the other. I've already
told you about the successes in which I fell on the
right side of the edge. There have been a couple of
failures where I've fallen on the other side.
Probably the worst one was the apparent detection
of helium emission in the spectrum of Io,
Jupiter's satellite Io. We in Hawaii, one of the
first things I did there was to work on a
near-infrared Fourier transform spectrometer.
And one of the first things we looked at with this
spectrometer after we finally got it online with
the 88-inch telescope was IO, by which time sodium
emission had already been detected in the
spectrum by Robert Brown and colleagues. But we
looked at it, and we detected this. We, that is with
Carl Pilcher and Bill Sinton, we detected helium
emission, the 10-8-30 band or line of helium We
rushed to a meeting that was held in Ithaca and
reported this and sent out an IAU circular on it,
and Don Hunton congratulated us on the detection
of helium emission. No one understood what it
meant, but they were all willing to believe that
this very peculiar object had helium emission,
and we all set out to understand it. And then we
discovered that this was spurious because the
interferometer control system used a helium lamp
to provide the clocking frequency. And while we
could not imagine how this Spirius signal got into
the signal chain, indeed it did. And our detection
of helium on Io was wrong. And Larry Trafton
continues to remind me of that, even though the
rest of the world until this very moment has
forgotten, mercifully forgotten. If you read any
of the popular books about exploration of the
solar system that have been coming out in the last
20 years. It's all done by the space probes. Of
course. What's your opinion? My opinion is that
the space probes wouldn't have even known where to
go or what to look at.